docs: sic51 (#64)
stateless-consensus/eth-stateless-book: src/development/sic-calls/history.md

- [Call #22: July 29, 2024](#call-22-july-29-2024)
- [Call #21: July 15, 2024](#call-21-july-15-2024)

## Call #51: May 04, 2026

[Agenda](https://github.com/ethereum/pm/issues/2030)

### Team updates

- Binary Tree implementation: [@gballet](https://x.com/gballet) added an extra field in the Binary Tree to explicitly tag whether a leaf is an account, storage slot, or code.

> - This removes ambiguity from state dumps, makes the structure closer to the old MPT layout, and reduces maintenance overhead since calling code can treat the Binary Tree much more like the previous trie.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- This removes ambiguity encountered in `evm t8n`'s state dumps, by making them match that of the old MPT layout. This reduces maintenance overhead on the execution specs side, since calling code can treat the Binary Tree much just like the previous trie.
```

- [@gballet](https://x.com/gballet) summarized recent discussions with [@vbuterin](https://x.com/VitalikButerin) and others around Validator-Only Partial Statefulness (VOPS).
- There is broad agreement to avoid naive Unified Binary Trees (UBT), since validators still need enough intermediate state to validate balances, nonces, and transaction correctness.
- The preferred direction is partial statefulness with domain separation:
  - accounts
  - code
  - nullifiers
  - storage
- The current proposal uses a 2-bit tagging scheme, while Vitalik suggested expanding to 16 bits for future extensibility.
- Recent Geth merges also support grouping internal nodes at depth 5–6, improving read/write performance by serializing grouped nodes.
- To support [EIP-8141 - Frame Transactions](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-8141), the first 64 storage slots may be duplicated inside the account stem to improve access while preserving lightweight validator sync.
- Snap sync could then focus mainly on account + code trees (optionally nullifiers) without requiring full storage sync for validators.
- A hybrid fallback design was also discussed: keeping one branch as MPT and another as Binary Tree.

>   - [@gballet](https://x.com/gballet) sees this as a possible fallback if pure Binary Trees cannot reach acceptable performance, though it adds significant complexity by maintaining two trees.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

  - [@gabrocheleau](https://x.com/GabRocheleau) noted this could also help future state expiry models where multiple trees coexist with rolling expiration.

### 32 byte addresses (@gballet)

- [@gballet](https://x.com/gballet) reviewed how Ethereum currently handles addresses inside the Binary Tree key hashing flow.
- Ethereum addresses are 20 bytes, derived from hashed public keys and truncated, then stored with 12 leading zero bytes to align them to 32 bytes.

> - The system recently moved to big-endian ordering to avoid unnecessary byte-swapping inside the EVM and simplify processing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The spec was recently updated to use big-endian ordering to avoid unnecessary byte-swapping inside the EVM and simplify processing.
```
